Euclid of Alexandria – Father of Geometry
	Modern mathematics is truly an incredible feat of human ingenuity; it is the culmination of the collective contributions of individuals over millennia, compiled into an organized pattern of thought and understanding based on logic and reasoning. The history of mathematics dates back to even prehistoric times, where the origins of mathematical thought may be derived from the concepts of number, magnitude, and form. Mathematics is not just a concept that was fabricated by human society out of sheer convenience, it is the study of understanding the underlying concepts that are present in all facets of life, and everywhere in existence. These concepts are, and always will be present in our universe, where the study of mathematics simply seeks to better understand them. Galileo Galilei, known as the “father of science” is quoted as saying:
“[The universe] cannot be read until we have learnt the language and become familiar with the characters in which it is written. It is written in mathematical language, and the letters are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without which means it is humanly impossible to comprehend a single word.” (O’Connor and Robinson, 2013)
It is here we begin to elaborate and understand just how significant the study of mathematics really is, and how studying these mathematical structures holds the key to understanding our own existence in the universe. 
Throughout history, we find evidence of human society seeking to understand and further define these concepts; each new idea beginning as a simple isolated discovery. As a result of the isolation that is characteristic of these early discoveries, the information learned from such discovery was often left in its isolation from other similar, or more original concepts. Written records from ancient societies often describe common threads and themes of understanding, such as the ancient Egyptians attempting to calculate the area of a circle, determining the value of pi to be 3.16, which was close enough to the exact value – 3.14 – for simple engineering purposes (Palmer, 2015). Similarly, N.S. Palmer continues on this notion:
“Ancient Babylonians also knew a lot of applied mathematics, including the Pythagorean theorem. Archaeological excavations at Nineveh discovered clay tablets with number triplets satisfying the Pythagorean theorem, such as 3-4-5, 5-12-13, and with considerably larger numbers.” (Palmer, 2015)
The fact that these common mathematical concepts share a common ancestry and are continuously used by later, more advanced societies, serves as evidence that these concepts are built upon one another, with each new discovery lighting the way for the next. Individual, isolated discoveries in mathematics were unlikely to withstand the test of time, as these ideas were lost for a number of reasons (e.g. Non-written, written on less permanent material, unrecognized in their time, small amount of copies produced, book burning, etc.). It is for this reason that Euclid of Alexandria is widely regarded as the greatest mathematics teacher in history.


EUCLID AS A HISTORICAL FIGURE
Accomplishments. Euclid in his time had produced a number of works, roughly half of which have been lost to time or for other unknown reasons. To this day and through the years leading to it, his most prominent work has remained prevalent in mathematical studies. This work is known as The Elements, a collection of 13 books presenting a clear, logical, and coherent framework of the complete understanding of the Geometry of his time, as well as other mathematical concepts such as Number Theory. Some of Euclid’s other surviving works include Data, On Division of Figures, Catoptrics, Phaenomena, and Optics. Although Euclid had provided many major contributions to the field of mathematics, he is best known for his work on The Elements, where he provides a complete written framework of the collective knowledge of mathematical concepts and principles, derived from other prominent mathematicians of his time and before him. This book is the first complete collection of mathematical concepts to be presented in a single logical framework. In this framework he presents the information by giving definitions, postulates, and axioms (which he called “Common Notions”). 
The Elements is to be considered a textbook, rather than a reference book, as it does not cover everything that is known. More on that, The Elements is simply a collection of material, most of which did not originate from Euclid himself. It is the culmination of the combined efforts of countless mathematicians, presented as one logically flowing framework to better understand the nature of geometry and mathematics. The Elements has been widely used, taught, and printed in its lifetime, making it arguably the second most popular book in history, next to the Bible. With this considered, one could also argue that The Elements would even be more fundamental to advancing humanity as a whole, as it allowed a significantly greater, widespread understanding of the underlying concepts that are present in the world around us. Euclid was a teacher of mathematics, and his grandest accomplishment being his incredibly popular textbook, it is more than reasonable to claim that Euclid is the greatest mathematics teacher in history.
Historical Context. Little to nothing is known about the life of the man known as Euclid of Alexandria. The information present today about his life and accomplishments has been pieced together either directly from his lasting works, or discerned from what other sources have said about him or his works. It is presumed he was Greek born around 300 B.C. in Tyre, and lived in Damascus for much of his life. However, there is a lack of evidence validating this claim, as Euclid of Alexandria is often confused for the man known as Euclid of Megara, a philosopher of the same era as Plato, and for thus reasons it is believed by many historians of mathematics that this is entirely fictitious (The Famous People, 2016). Furthermore, since so little is known about his biographical information, something that is rather uncharacteristic of the time period which he existed, it is believed by many researchers that Euclid of Alexandria may not have existed at all. The most likely explanations for this is best summed up by Jean Itard:
i)	Euclid was an historical character who wrote the Elements and other works attributed to him.
ii)	Euclid was the leader of a team of mathematicians working at Alexandria. They all contributed to writing the ‘complete works of Euclid’, even continuing to write books under Euclid’s name after his death.
iii)	Euclid was not an historical character. The ‘complete works of Euclid’ were written by a team of mathematicians at Alexandria who took the name Euclid from the historical character Euclid of Megara who had lived about 100 years earlier.
(O’Connor and Robinson, 1999)
While the original author of these claims (Itard) favors the second of these possibilities, there is varied evidence to support all three of these claims. First, there is very little evidence that is inconsistent with the first hypothesis (O’Connor and Robinson, 1999). Evidence supporting this claim lies in Euclid’s supposed school of mathematics in Alexandria. In this case, it is entirely possible that Euclid would have a team of mathematicians at his disposal to assist in writing his books. This theory is both reinforced and discredited by the fact that each book in The Elements leans toward its own unique style of writing, which could mean that either Euclid’s students assisted in the development of said books, or that Euclid had never existed and was instead a collection of books written by a separate team of mathematicians writing under the common name ‘Euclid’, as claimed by the third hypothesis. The issue regarding the third hypothesis is that there is significant evidence found in references about Euclid by other highly regarded or prominent figures of the time of his existence. It isn’t entirely impossible that the originators of said references could have been aware of this fictitious ‘Euclid’, however this team of mathematicians that composed the entirety of The Elements would have to be outstanding mathematicians in their own right, yet virtually no evidence exists to support who they might be, thus the first or second hypotheses tend to be held in higher regard.
EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY
Euclid’s lasting legacy in the form of The Elements is nothing short of miraculous. Considering how many written works from his time have been lost to the ages, most commonly due to destruction of the original material in some way, it is truly remarkable that his crowning achievement has lasted for centuries. For well over two millennia, The Elements has been the definitive textbook on the study of geometry and mathematics. Considering the extent that this book has been studied, it should come as no surprise the impact it has had not just on mathematics, but on the concept of an organized, written collection of information, to be passed on through history – maintaining the works of its predecessors and expanding on it. Over these many years, The Elements has inspired essentially a revolution in learning and understanding, setting the model for mathematical argument, following logical deductions from initial assumptions in order to establish proof of previously unproven theorems. In The Elements, Euclid refers to these concepts as ‘Axioms’ and ‘Postulates’, as well as providing definitions to further reinforce these notions.
	Axioms:
1)	Things which are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
2)	If equals are added to equals, the whole are equal.
3)	If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.
4)	Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another.
5)	The whole is greater than the part.
Postulates:
1)	To draw a line from any point to any point.
2)	To produce a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
3)	To describe a circle with any center and distance.
4)	That all right angles are equal to one another.
5)	That, if a straight line falling on two straight lines make the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles, the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on the side of which are the angles less than the two right angles.
(Weisstein)
It is on these Axioms and Postulates that Euclid had set the rough logical foundation on which to expand upon the currently understood concepts of geometry. In his work, Euclid had not compiled a collection of his own original ideas, but rather set out to establish irrefragable proof of already existing theorems, and adding only a few of his own original concepts as well. One example of this is known as the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, or the Unique Factorization Theorem. In this, Euclid had proven that every positive integer greater than 1 can be written as a product of prime numbers – or is a prime number itself. This proof is the first known example of a proof by contradiction, further establishing a model of mathematical argument that is still seen (and widely used) today. Furthermore, Euclid had also proven that there are infinitely many prime numbers in what is often referred to as Euclid’s Theorem. It is on these logical guidelines that the study of Euclidean Geometry is founded upon. Euclidean Geometry is the study of plane and solid figures, backed by his previously established axioms and postulates.
NON – EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY
Up until the mid to late nineteenth century, Euclidean Geometry had simple been referred to as ‘Geometry’, as it completely encompassed the entirety of the subject. The foundation laid by Euclid’s Elements had structured the understanding of geometry as a whole up to this point. Being widely accepted as a near perfect structure for the area of study, it was only a matter of time until someone could successfully disprove any of Euclid’s work. 
The Parallel Postulate. When studying Euclid’s five postulates, it becomes clear that the fifth is different from the four previous. Euclid himself was dissatisfied with this postulate and tried to avoid using it for as long as possible, so much so that the first 28 propositions of The Elements are proved without it (O’Connor and Robinson, 1996). It became well known that there was some fallacy regarding this postulate, and thus many mathematicians set out to investigate further why this might be. Ultimately after many unsuccessful attempts by many different individuals, we arrive at the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss, who had begun to elaborate on the possible consequences of a geometry that accepted the idea of a parallel postulate; that more than one line can be drawn through a given point parallel to a given line. Gauss, however, had never published this work, continuing in relative secrecy. He discussed this theory further with his friend Farkas Bolyai, a man who had devoted a majority of his life to understanding the parallel postulate, with little to no success. Bolyai had become exhausted by his studies and the consistent futility of his work, so much so that he had told his son János Bolyai “not to waste one hour’s time on that problem” – referring to the problem of the fifth postulate. Despite this warning, János continued his work in his father’s footsteps. In 1823, János had made an incredible discovery regarding the parallel postulate that would ultimately lead to the creation of an entirely new type of geometry, referred to as Non-Euclidean Geometry, as it had gone against the original framework established by Euclid. While the attribution of the discovery is entirely credited to János, Gauss had told János following the discovery that he had already discovered all of this earlier, but had not published the work (O’Connor and Robinson, 1996)
HISTORICAL IMPACT
It is all too clear the influence of Euclid’s work on human society. Since the time of its conception, The Elements has been a primary source of geometric reasoning, theorems, and methods, tremendously influencing human affairs until the advent of Non-Euclidean geometry in the nineteenth century. Through his work, Euclid had set a standard for geometric instruction and understanding, as well as laying the foundations of deductive reasoning for more than two millennia (Van Der Waerden, Taisbak). While aspects of his work may have been disproven or corrected in much later years, Euclid still provided a nearly flawless understanding of advanced mathematics for his time, allowing many to benefit from a logically constructed textbook that would persist through the generations.
Euclid of Alexandria may or may not have existed as a historical character, teaching mathematical and logical concepts to others through his school in Alexandria. Or perhaps he existed solely as a group of mathematicians writing under a single unified title. Whoever he might have been in his time is mostly irrelevant, as the historical influence he and his work has exerted are tremendous in their own right. As the author of arguably the most influential book of all time, Euclid has truly shaped the way human society has observed the world. He allowed people to view the world from a mathematical perspective, furthering our understanding of seemingly random occurrences in the world around us, or identifying patterns in nature and understanding the mathematics behind them. Euclid might not have existed, but the impact he has had on humanity for over two thousand years is anything but fictitious.








REFERENCES
Reid, Constance. A Long Way From Euclid. New York City: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1963. Print. 

O'Connor, J. J., and E. F. Robertson. "Non-Euclidean Geometry - University of St Andrews." Non-Euclidean Geometry. JOC/EFR, Feb. 1996. Web. 7 Dec. 2016. 

N.S. Palmer. “Euclid,” Ancient History Encyclopedia. Last modified October 23, 2015. http://www.ancient.eu /Euclid/.

"Euclid." 2016. The Famous People website. Dec 7 2016, 10:15 //www.thefamouspeople.com/profiles/euclid-436.php.

Van Der Waerden, Bartel Leendert, and Christian Marinus Taisbak. "Euclid." Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Encyclopedia Britannica, n.d. Web. 07 Dec. 2016. 

Mastin, Luke. "Euclid - Hellenistic Mathematics - The Story of Mathematics." Euclid - Hellenistic Mathematics - The Story of Mathematics. N.p., 2010. Web. 07 Dec. 2016. 

O'Connor, J. J., and E. F. Robertson. "Non-Euclidean Geometry - University of St Andrews." Non-Euclidean Geometry. JOC/EFR, Feb. 1996. Web. 7 Dec. 2016. 

Weisstein, Eric W. "Euclid's Postulates." From MathWorld--A Wolfram Web Resource. http://mathworld.wolfram.com/EuclidsPostulates.html

O'Connor, J. J., and E. F. Robinson. "Quotations by Galileo Galilei." Quotations by Galileo. JOC/EFR, Dec. 2013. Web. 07 Dec. 2016. 
